Zeal Rules

# Introduction

## Objective

In Zeal you will recruit characters, deploy devices and cast spells to
defeat your opponents' bases. The last player with a base standing wins
the game.

## Components

-   216 Cult cards

-   48 Base cards

-   8 Devotion dials

# The Cards

## Devotion

Characters, devices and spells go in your deck and you can play them
from your hand. The Devotion cost of these cards is indicated in the top
left corner of the card, and you must pay this cost to play the card.
See Playing Actions for more details on when you can play cards.

## Card Types

There are four card types: bases, characters, devices and spells.

### Bases

You start the game with six bases in play with defense scores from 1
through 6 from left to right. When you lose all of your bases, you lose
the game.

#### Defense

The defense score on a base, indicated in the black shield at the top of
the card, shows how much damage it takes to defeat it. When a base is
defeated, turn it face down.

### Characters

Play characters from your hand during your commit step when no other
actions are being played. Your characters can engage in combat to defeat
your opponents' bases and defend your own bases. When a character dies,
put it in your discard.

#### Combat

The combat score for a character, indicated in the white shield at the
top of the card, shows how much damage the character deals in combat,
and how much damage it takes to kill it.

If a character's combat score is reduced to 0, it dies.

### Devices

Play devices from your hand during your commit step when no other
actions are being played. Devices remain in play until they are
explicitly destroyed.

### Spells

Play spells from your hand any time you can play an action. When the
spell resolves, put the card in your discard pile.

## Damage

Bases and characters can take damage. Damage can accumulate throughout a
turn, but it is "forgotten" between turns.

## Cults

There are four cults in this game: Cognoid, Lunari, Magi and Specter.

### Zeal

A card has "Zeal" if you control another character or device from the
same faction, or if you've resolved a spell from that faction that turn.

When a card has Zeal, use its Zeal cost, Zeal combat score and Zeal text
indicated in green. Zeal text modifies and/or adds to the non-Zeal text,
unless it says "instead".

# Gameplay

#### Two Players

These rules assume a two player game. See "More than two players" for
rules clarifications when playing with more than two players.

#### Exceptions

Keywords and card text often make exceptions to these general rules.

## Game Setup

### Bases

Each player puts each base into play from defense 1 through 6 from left
to right.

### Devotion

Each player gets a devotion dial and sets their maximum and current
devotion to zero.

### Shuffle and draw

Determine the first player randomly. The first player draws six cards
and the second player draws seven.

### Mulligan

Starting with the first player, each player gets one opportunity to
shuffle their deck and draw a new hand.

## Turn Overview

On your turn, you follow four steps: Develop, Combat, Commit and End of
Turn.

### Develop

Choose to draw a card or increase your maximum devotion by one, then set
your current devotion to your maximum devotion.

### Combat

During your combat step you will choose characters you have in play to
attack with, your opponent will decide how to block, you will decide how
to flank, and then combat damage will be dealt to characters and bases.
See the Combat section for more details.

### Commit

You can normally only play characters and devices during your Commit
step. See Playing Actions for more details on playing your cards.

### End of Turn

At the end of your turn you and your opponent will both get an
opportunity to play actions, including your "At the end of your turn"
actions.

## Playing Actions

### Actions

An action is any time you:

-   Play a card

-   Play an action on a card with a cost, indicated by ":"

-   Play a triggered action on a card, indicated by "---"

### Restrictions

Some actions can only be played at certain times.

Characters and devices can only be played on your turn, during the
Commit step, when no other actions are being played, unless the
character has Ambush.

Triggered actions can only be played directly after the trigger. See
Keywords for more details.

No actions can be played in the Develop step.

### Playing and resolving actions

On your turn, you get an opportunity to play an action at the start of
each step (except the Develop step).

Any time you get an opportunity to play an action you may play an
action, or you may pass.

Whenever you play an action or pass, your opponent gets an opportunity
to play an action. If both players pass, play moves to the next step of
the turn (or to the next turn if you're in the End of turn step).

An action resolves when the other player passes. After an action
resolves, that player gets another opportunity to play an action.

#### Example

It's Anton's turn on his Commit step. He plays the character Psychopomp.
Alena gets a chance to respond before Psychopomp resolves. She wants to
kill another one of Anton's characters before Psychopomp resolves so he
doesn't get to draw a card when it dies, so she targets it with a Burn
spell. Anton now gets a chance to respond to Alena's Burn spell with an
action of his own, and he plays Outmaneuver to save his character. Alena
now gets an opportunity to respond, but she doesn't have any further
actions and she passes. Since Alena passed, Outmaneuver resolves and
Jack gets another chance to respond to Burn. He has no further actions
he wants to play and passes, so Burn resolves. Finally Jill gets one
more chance to respond to Psychopomp, but passes and Psychopomp
resolves, entering play.

### Choosing Targets

When you play an action that has one or more targets, you must declare
your targets before your opponent decides how to respond.

Whenever an action has one or more targets, you may choose no targets if
you wish.

If your target is no longer in play or no longer a valid target by the
time your action resolves, resolve the action as though you had not
chosen that target.

### Triggered Actions

Play triggered actions directly after the triggering event is completed.
This creates an opportunity to play actions when players couldn't
normally play actions, such as between two steps. Triggered actions are
not optional unless they say "you may" or have a cost, but you can
choose no targets just as with any action.

When multiple triggered actions are triggered by the same event, the
player who controls the triggered actions plays them one at a time in
any order. Triggered actions are still played, even if the triggering
card was removed during the triggering event.

If two players both have actions triggered by the same triggering event,
the player whose turn it is plays their triggered actions first, then
the other player does.

## Combat

Before each combat step, each player gets a chance to play actions. When
both players pass, execute the instructions for the combat step.

### Choose Attackers

The attacking player chooses any characters they have in play to attack.
Move them forward to indicate which characters are attacking.

### Choose Blockers

The defending player may choose characters to blockwith. Assign each
blocking character to one attacking character. Attacking characters can
be blocked by up to two characters.

### Flanking

The attacking player may choose any attacking, unblocked characters to
flank a blocking character. Blocking characters can be flanked by up to
one character (in addition to the character it's blocking).

### Combat Damage

All combat damage is simultaneous, so if two characters deal enough
damage to kill each other, both characters die.

A blocking character deals its damage to the attacking character it's
blocking.

If an attacking character is blocked by two characters, the attacking
player chooses one blocking character to deal that character's damage
to.

If an attacking character is blocked by one character, it deals its
damage to the blocking character.

A flanking character deals its damage to the character it's flanking.

If a character is removed from play after it blocks but before combat
damage, treat the attacking character as blocked by the same number of
characters.

#### Dealing Combat Damage to Bases

One at a time choose a base for each attacking character that is
unblocked. That character deals its damage to that base. Any excess
damage is dealt to an adjacent base. Bases are considered adjacent if
they have the same defense value or defense values within one of each
other.

When a base is defeated, turn it face down to indicate that it's
defeated.

# Keywords

## Character Keywords

### Ambush

Ambush removes the restriction that Characters can only be played during
your commit step when no other actions are being played. Ambush
characters can be played any time you can play any actions.

### Assimilate

Whenever a base this character has dealt damage to this turn is
defeated, gain control of that base instead of turning it face down.

### Execute

When a character with execute deals any damage to a character, kill that
character.

### Fly

A character with fly can't be blocked or flanked except by other
characters with fly.

### Hunt

When a character with hunt is selected as an attacker, choose a
character to block it. That character is immediately assigned as a
blocker to the hunting character. If more characters with hunt attack
than there are characters to block them, the attacking player chooses
which hunting characters are blocked.

### Immune

Can't be dealt damage, targeted, reanimated or killed by whatever it's
immune to. Characters keep their immunity even when they're in the
discard.

### Overpower

A character with overpower deals its damage to "two combatants" when it
is blocked.

When a character with overpower is blocked by two characters, deal its
full combat damage to both characters instead of choosing one.

When a character with overpower is blocked by one character, deal its
damage to that character, but then also deal its damage to the defending
player's bases as though it wasn't blocked.

## Trigger Keywords

### Conquer

Conquer triggers when the character defeats any number of bases in
combat. A base counts as defeated by the character as long as it dealt
any combat damage to the defeated base. Conquer triggers after all
combat damage has been dealt, before moving to the Commit step.

### Debut Spell

Debut spell is triggered after the character enters play. This is a
special trigger, because it counts as a spell, and can be countered as a
spell. Characters that are immune to spells, are immune to Debut Spells.

### At the end of your turn

Play your actions with this trigger in your End of Turn step. You must
play these actions unless they have a cost or say you may play them,
then they are optional. Play them one at a time when no other actions
are being played.

Once you've entered your End of Turn step, it's too late to stop your
actions with this trigger. If you have a device with this trigger that
is destroyed during the End of Turn step, you can still play that
action.

If you want to prevent your opponent from using a device with "At the
end of your turn" triggers, make sure you destroy it before the End of
Turn step!

If a device with this trigger enters play in your End of Turn step, you
can play it (and must unless it's optional).

#### Reconnect

Reconnect is just a special "At the end of your turn" action. Play
Reconnect actions following the same rules as "At the end of your turn"
actions. Reconnect is optional.

Some cards with Reconnect have special instructions for how to Connect
the card. Follow those instructions when you Reconnect.

### When a character dies

Play this action directly after a character dies. If it died during
combat, wait until after all combat damage is dealt to play this action,
just like Conquer.

If multiple characters with this trigger die in the same triggering
event, such as combat, or during the resolution of a spell, they all
"see" each other die, and trigger for each character that died.

#### Example

Alena has two Chalice Keepers and a Psychopomp in play. Anton plays
Revenge of the Goddess. Alena gets six current devotion and draws two
cards.

### When you resolve a spell

Play this action directly after resolving a spell card. Wait for the
spell to fully resolve before playing the action. If the spell is
countered, this action is not triggered.

Debut spells do not trigger "when you resolve a spell" actions.

### When a character attacks/blocks

Play this action directly after choosing all of your attackers or
blockers.

## Other Keywords

### Connect

When you play a device with connect, target a character. As long as the
character is still in play when the device resolves, it enters play
connected to that character. Otherwise, put it into play not connected
to anything.

When a character leaves play or changes controllers, disconnect all
devices from it.

Some cards have special rules for how to connect them:

#### Neurocontroller

When you connect or reconnect Neurocontroller, first disconnect all
devices connected to the target character and gain control of the
character. When the Neurocontroller is disconnected from a character,
return the character to its previous controller.

#### Reanimation Chamber

When you connect or reconnect the Reanimation Chamber, first reanimate a
character and it becomes the target of the Reanimation Chamber. When the
Reanimation Chamber is disconnected from a character, that character
dies.

### Develop

One at a time, choose whether to increase your maximum devotion by one,
or draw a card, a number of times indicated by the number.

### Invincible

Can't be damaged, defeated, destroyed or killed.

An invincible character can still be sacrificed, and still dies if its
combat score is reduced to 0 or less.

### Reanimate a character

Put a character from any discard into play under your control.

### Restore a base

Turn a defeated (face down) base, face up.

## Additional Glossary

### Owner

A card's "owner" is the player who started with the card in their deck.

### Defeat target base

Turn target base face down.

### Kill target character

Put it in its owner's discard.

### Destroy target device

Put it in its owner's discard.

### Counter target spell

Cancel a spell card or debut spell that's being played. It has no
effect.

### Sacrifice a Base

Choose a base you control and turn it face down.

### Sacrifice a Character

Choose a character you control. It dies (even if it's invincible).

### Current Devotion

The amount of devotion you currently have available to spend. When you
spend devotion, reduce your current devotion by that much.

### Maximum Devotion

The amount you set your current devotion to during your Develop step. It
is possible to temporarily have more current devotion than maximum
devotion by casting Accelerate.

# More than two players

In a game with more than two players, when a player has no bases
remaining, that player is eliminated, and the last player with a base
standing wins the game.

## Playing Actions

In practice, players should stop you if they have a response, but if the
order in which multiple players' responses resolve isn't clear, you can
follow these rules.

Whenever you play an action or pass, each opponent, in turn order, gets
an opportunity to play an action. If all players pass, play moves to the
next step of the turn (or to the next turn if you're in the End of turn
step).

An action resolves when all other players pass. After an action
resolves, that player gets another opportunity to play an action.

## Combat

Combat works the same, except that when you choose attackers, you can
send each of your characters to attack any single opponent, or no one.
Players can only choose blockers for attacks against themselves, and
only characters attacking a defending player may flank that player's
characters.

# Game Modes

## Cult Decks

The quickest way to start playing is to pick up all the cards from one
cult and treat it as a deck.

## Constructed Decks

If you and another player both own a copy of the game, you can construct
your own deck. A constructed deck should have 36 cards, and can contain
only cards that come in one copy of the game.

Of course you can add any restrictions you like to change the parameters
of constructed decks. You could make the decks bigger or smaller,
require a certain number of decks from each cult, ban all one-of cards,
or whatever other restrictions you agree to.

## Limited Constructed

If you want to construct decks with one other player but only have one
copy of the game there's a few ways you could do that. One way is to
shuffle all the cards, deal each player 54 cards, and then build a 24
card deck each from those cards.

Another way could be to give each player two of the cults and construct
a deck from those cards. You could try drafting the cults themselves,
where one player picks one cult, the other picks two and gives the first
player the last cult.

## Draft Tournament

This game was designed with drafting in mind.

To draft, shuffle all 216 cards together. Deal each player three 9-card
"packs" of cards. Each player picks up their first pack, picks a card,
and passes the rest of the cards to their left. Take the pack passed
from your right and pick another card for your deck, and so on. When
you're passed two cards, pick one and put the other one in the center
face down.

Repeat this process two more times with the other two packs, passing
right the second time, and left the third time. Everyone should now have
a deck of 24 cards and is ready to start playing.

### 4 Player Round Robin

With four players you can play a round robin tournament in three rounds.
Pair up against each other player. For each pair, play a best of two
match with each player getting an opportunity to be the first player. If
you win both games, you win the match. If you each win one game, it's a
draw. At the end the player with the most match wins, wins the
tournament. If there's a tie, you can finish drawn matches to resolve
the tie.

### 6-8 Player Team Draft

With six or eight players, a team draft is recommended. The players
split into two teams and sit in alternating order during the draft. Each
player then plays a best of two match against each player on the
opposing team. The team with the most match wins, wins the tournament,
again, finishing drawn matches in the case of a tie.

### 8 Player Variant

Some players don't like that they aren't able to "wheel" any cards in an
8 player draft. A variant to resolve that complaint in an 8 player draft
is to deal each player two 13-card packs instead of three 9-card packs
during the draft, and pass them both in the same direction (to your
left).

### Best of Three Variant

Some players prefer to play best of three instead of best of two so they
don't have to change seats as often. This can just take a little bit
longer to finish the tournament.

### Sideboard Variant

Instead of throwing out the last card you can pass that card as well,
making the last pass the last pick for your deck. Then before your first
game, remove three cards from your deck that you can switch in and out
of your deck in between games.

# Rules Clarifications

## Card Clarifications

### Accelerate

-   Accelerate can increase your current devotion above your maximum
    devotion, but not above 13.

### Andrenid Destroyer

-   How many devices you control when you play the debut spell is what
    matters, since that's when you choose a target. If your device count
    is reduced below the target's cost after Andrenid Destroyer enters
    play but before the debut spell resolves, the target is still
    destroyed or killed.

-   However, your foe can respond to Andrenid Destroyer itself by
    destroying a device so that by the time you play its debut spell you
    have a reduced device count and must choose a target with a lower
    devotion cost.

### Andrenid Worker

-   How many devices you control when the debut spell resolves is what
    matters.

-   Andrenid Worker can put a device into play connected to itself.

-   You can search your deck for a Conversion Cannon if you control no
    devices.

### Apocalypse Chamber

-   If Apocalypse Chamber is invincible when you play its action, the
    action resolves without destroying Apocalypse Chamber.

### Asterion Bull

-   If you and your foe both control an Asterion Bull with Zeal and they
    both die at the same time and you both control one base, the
    triggers of the player whose turn it is happen first, so that player
    wins.

### Asterion Crusher

-   You can't connect a device to Asterion Crusher, including the
    Reanimation Chamber which can't reanimate it.

-   Asterion Crusher does benefit from Ancient Obelisk which doesn't
    target any characters.

### Bloodmoon Ritual

-   If you control fewer than two characters when Bloodmoon Ritual
    resolves, you don't sacrifice any characters, and you don't search
    your deck.

-   If you control at least two characters, you must sacrifice two
    characters when Bloodmoon Ritual resolves.

-   If Bloodmoon Ritual is countered, don't sacrifice any characters.

### Cnidarian Immortal

-   Cnidarian Immortal doesn't take combat damage, so it doesn't die to
    combat damage from characters with execute.

### Cnidarian Lord

-   If a foe's character has 1 combat normally, but more than 1 combat
    this turn, it dies at the start of the next turn before either
    player has a chance to increase its combat.

### Conversion Cannon

-   Because putting a card on the bottom of its owner's deck is a cost,
    it happens before your opponent gets a chance to respond.

### Dirac Archmage

-   Dirac Archmage can reduce the cost of a spell to 0, but not below 0.

### Entanglement Collider

-   This action never triggers and so can't be played if the spell is
    countered.

-   Your foe can respond to the spell copy.

-   If you play a spell without Zeal and copy it, the copy gets Zeal
    from the original spell.

-   You can copy a spell you gained control of with Invert.

### Formic Commander

-   If you connect a Detainment Cell to a character that is already
    attacking or blocking, that character is still attacking or
    blocking. Detainment Cell prevents a character from being chosen as
    an attacker or blocker.

-   If you play a device with an "At the end of your turn" triggered
    action in your End of Turn step, you get to play that action.

### God Matrix

-   If you put a device with an "At the end of your turn" triggered
    action, you get to play that action.

### Invert

-   Invert can gain control of a debut spell.

-   If you gain control of a spell, it grants Zeal to your cards that
    share a cult with it.

-   If you gain control of Lighting Storm, X is whatever it was for the
    original caster.

-   "When you resolve a spell" triggers twice when you gain control of a
    spell with Invert. Once when Invert resolves, and once when the
    gained spell resolves.

### Lightning Storm

-   You can play Lightning Storm for 0 to gain Zeal or trigger "When you
    resolve a spell" triggers for free.

-   If you control Dirac Archmage, you can play Lightning Storm for 0
    devotion and still deal 1 damage.

### Neurocontroller

-   If Neurocontroller is disconnected from a character you own but that
    was controlled by your foe when you connected Neurocontroller to it,
    your foe takes the character back.

### Noctium Gargoyle

-   Activating Noctium Gargoyle doesn't clear damage from it.

-   If a device is connected to Noctium Gargoyle when it stops being a
    character, the device stays connected to it.

### Nullmage Warrior

-   Nullmage Warrior is immune to global spells like Revenge of the
    Goddess.

-   Nullmage Warrior is immune to debut spells like Cnidarian Assassin.

-   Nullmage Warrior is immune to beneficial spells like Coordinated
    Strike.

### Possess the Dead

-   If you play Possess the Dead before your "Choose attackers" step,
    you can choose the character you put into play as an attacker.

-   If you play Possess the Dead without Zeal, the character dies at the
    end of the turn and "when this dies" triggers happen.

-   If you play Possess the Dead without Zeal, and the character is
    invincible at the end of the turn, it still dies even though it's
    invincible.

-   If Possess the Dead puts a Specter character into play, that
    character gains Zeal from having cast Possess the Dead.

-   If Possess the Dead doesn't have Zeal and puts a Specter character
    into play, that character dies at the end of the turn, since Possess
    the dead didn't have Zeal.

### Possess the Living

-   If you cast Possess the Living without Zeal on a character you own
    but that was controlled by your foe when you cast it, your opponent
    gets the character back the next turn.

### Reanimation Chamber

-   If the Reanimation Chamber is disconnected from an invincible
    character, that character still dies even though it's invincible.

-   If another player gains control of a character reanimated by
    Reanimation Chamber, it dies, since Reanimation Chamber is
    disconnected from it.

### Revenge of the Goddess

-   The "when this character dies" triggers on characters you control,
    and the one granted to your characters by Revenge of the Goddess
    happen in whichever order you choose.

### Void

-   If you counter Asterion Bull's debut spell and it has Zeal, its
    "when this dies" trigger happens when Void kills it.

### Waveform Master

-   If this is reanimated with a spell, you get to draw a card. You can
    think of "when you resolve a spell" as adding the action text as
    "and then..." to the end of each spell you play.

## Frequently Asked Questions

###### Can I attack with a character the turn it enters play?

Yes! The trick is getting the character into play by the Choose
Attackers step of your Combat step. You can play a character with Ambush
before you Choose Attackers, or if you could get a character into play
with a spell before your Choose Attackers step, you can choose it as an
attacker.

###### Do I turn my characters sideways to attack with them?

No.

###### If the target of a spell is removed by the time the spell resolves, is the spell countered?

No. Resolve the spell as if that target wasn't chosen. If it was the
only target, resolve the spell as if no targets were chosen.

###### Can I counter a character or device with a counterspell?

No. "Counter target spell" lets you counter a spell card or debut spell.

###### Can I hold priority and respond to myself?

No. As soon as you play an action, your opponent gets priority to
respond. If they pass, your action resolves. Then you can take another
action if you want to.

###### If a character with assimilate deals just one damage to a base that is defeated, do you still gain control of it?

Yes.

###### If a character with assimilate deals damage to multiple bases that get defeated, do you gain control of all of them?

Yes.

###### If a character with overpower flanks, does it still deal its damage to a base as though it weren't blocked?

No.

###### If a character with overpower is blocked by two characters, and one or both of them die before it assigns combat damage, does it assign damage to a base as though it weren't blocked?

No.

# Credits

Game Design --- Wylliam Judd

Graphic Design --- Benjamin Treilhou

## Art

Noctium Gargoyle --- Anton Fort

etc...

# One Page Quick Rules

## Turn Order

**Develop**

Choose to draw a card or increase your maximum devotion by one. Set your
current devotion to your maximum.

**Combat**

**1. Choose Attackers**

**2. Choose Blockers**

**3. Flanking**

**4. Combat damage**

**Commit**

Play characters and devices.

**End of Turn**

Play " At the end of your turn " actions.

## Glossary

**Ambush **--- Play any time

**Assimilate **--- Gain control of bases it defeats

**Execute **--- Kill characters it damages

**Fly **--- Can't be blocked or flanked except by other characters with
fly

**Hunt **--- When it attacks, choose a character to block it

**Overpower **--- When blocked by two characters, it deals damage to
both. When blocked by one character, it deals damage to the blocking
character and defender's bases as if unblocked.

**Debut Spell **--- Triggers when the character enters play

**Conquer **--- Triggers when the character defeats one or more bases
